# Agile / Communication Workshop

## Learning Objectives

- Understand what some Agile work practices are and how to utilise them for workflow
- Be able to identify qualities of an effective Stand-Up
- Better understand how to organise your workload effectively as a team
- Better understand how to communicate effectively as a team

## Agile working practices

A set of software development practices which focuses on _people doing the work and how they work together_, rather than purely on output of that team.

Agile working focuses on how the members of a team organise themselves and respond to change.

### **Kanban board**

A tool to visualize and optimise workflow.

The goal of a Kanban board system is to limit the amount of work in process.

The board is split into multiple columns: 'to do', 'doing' and 'done' although some boards have other columns added as needed.

Cards placed on the board represent individual tasks. Cards may also have due dates, persons assigned to complete the task, and indications of the tasks difficulty.

### **Stand up/SCRUM**

A Stand Up is a daily meeting of a team where everyone is stood up - this is so everyone is uncomfortable enough to keep discussions to a minimum. All members share:

1.  How far they are with their work,
2.  What they will be working on,
3.  If there is anything hindering their performance. _Alternatively_, the focus can be on each task, rather than team member.

As Stand Ups are task oriented they often use Kanban boards as a focus point. Stand- ups are a good time to confirm a task moving columns or additional tasks being added.

### **Spiking**

Spikes are exploratory. They represent activities such as research, design, investigation, exploration, and prototyping solutions to a task.

The purpose of a spike is to gain the knowledge necessary to reduce the risk of a technical approach, better understand a requirement, or increase the reliability of a story estimate.

### **Riskiest Assumption Tests (RATS)**

Related to MVPs (Minimum Viable Product) and spiking, RATS put the focus on learning and overcoming any major stumbling blocks that could derail a project.

The aim of RATS is to prove elements of a project are _doable_ and therefore the project _viable_.

RATS test small individual units or integrations of tools that a project is based upon.

RATS test the idea viability without having to develop the whole product.
