# Web Servers

## Prior Knowledge

- The anatomy of a url: protocol, domain, path, queries
- The definition of a parametric endpoint.
- Some basic status codes. (200: ok, 201: created, 404: not found, 500: internal server error)
- The different types of HTTP requests: _GET_, _POST_, _PUT/PATCH_ and _DELETE_
- How to make a http request with insomnia / browser.

## Learning Objectives

By the end of the sprint you should:

- How to use Node's API to build a server
- Understand why http.createServer requires a `responseHandler` callback
- Understand how a server listen out for requests on a basic level
- Understand the use of the request and response parameters in the `createServer` callback
- Use properties & methods on the `response` object to build and send a JSON server http response
- Understand how to assemble a body from packets of data sent over from the client side.

## Clients and Servers

A client is an application making a request for external data - typically a browser.

A server is any program listening for requests on a computer port, that then processes these requests and sends responses accordingly.

For web development purposes, both request and response will usually follow the `http` protocol.

## Building a server from scratch

We can use the built-in node `http` library to build a server.

### createServer()

The `.createServer` method is used to create the actual server itself, and takes a single argument which is a request/response handler - a callback function that is called each time that the server receives a request.

```js
const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
  console.log(request);
});
```

### listen()

In order for a server to be able to receive and handle requests, it must be **listening** for requests. To make an `http` server listen, we must invoke the server's `.listen` method with the port number that the server should be listening on.

```js
const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
  console.log(request);
});

server.listen(9090);
```

In order to get the server listening, the file must be run using `node`, e.g. `node server.js`.

The `listen` method also takes a second argument, which is a callback function that can be used to handle any errors when setting the server up to listen, e.g.:

```js
server.listen(9090, (err) => {
  if (err) console.log(err);
  else console.log("Server listening on port: 9090");
});
```

### Sending a response

Once the server is listening and receives a request from a client, the `createServer` request/response callback function will be invoked. And using the `response` variable, a response can be sent back to the client, by setting the appropriate headers (`.setHeader()`), status code (`.statusCode =`) , and body (`.write()`, which must be passed a string value):

```js
const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
  response.setHeader("Content-Type", "application/json");
  response.statusCode = 200;
  response.write(JSON.stringify({ msg: "hello world" }));
  response.end();
});

server.listen(9090, (err) => {
  if (err) console.log(err);
  else console.log("Server listening on port: 9090");
});
```

Once the response has been formed, `response.end()` needs to be invoked in order to send the response, otherwise the browser/insomnia will still be hanging: i.e. the request won't have ended!

### Using the method and url

Within the callback function passed to `.createServer` we can add conditional logic to change what our server does based on different requests. For example changing the logic based on different request methods, url paths and queries.

```js
const server = http.createServer((request, response) => {
  const { method, url } = request;
  if (url === "/" && method === "GET") {
    response.setHeader("Content-Type", "application/json");
    response.statusCode = 200;
    response.write(JSON.stringify({ msg: "Server up and running" }));
    response.end();
  }
  if (url === "/users" && method === "GET") {
    // logic to retrieve users data and send back to the client on the response body
  }
  if (url === "/users" && method === "POST") {
    // logic to add the new user from the request body to the data and send the appropriate response
  }
});

server.listen(9090, (err) => {
  if (err) console.log(err);
  else console.log("Server listening on port: 9090");
});
```

### Assembling the request body

When dealing with POST/PATCH/PUT requests that include information on the request body the body of a request must be pieced together from the `request` object. This is similar to collecting the packets of data that form the body of a _response_ when making requests using `http`.

```js
let body = "";
request.on("data", (packet) => {
  body += packet.toString();
});
request.on("end", () => {
  // logic to handle the body from the request and update the data
});
```
