# Async / Await

## Learning Objectives

- know how to declare and async functions
- know how to use the `await` operator
- know where it is possible to use the await operator
- know how to use async/await in combination with promise chains
- know how to wait for multiple promises to resolve using `await`
- know the benefits and drawbacks of the async/await pattern

## Introduction

The async / await pattern is [syntactic sugar](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Syntactic_sugar) which allows promise-based asynchronicity to be written in an alternative style: without promise chains, `.then` or `.catch` blocks.

## Async Functions

Async functions are declared using the `async` keyword:

```js
// function declaration
async function myFunc() {}

// arrow function
const myOtherFunc = async () => {};

// as a method in an object
const myObj = {
  method: async function () {},
};

// as a method on a class
class MyClass {
  async method() {}
}
```

> Async functions always return a promise. If the return value of an async function is not explicitly a promise, it will be implicitly wrapped in a promise.

For example, the following:

```js
async function returnOne() {
  return 1;
}
```

...is equivalent to:

```js
function returnOne() {
  return Promise.resolve(1);
}
```

## The `await` Operator

Once inside of an async function, the `await` operator can be put in front of any promise (or promise-based function invocation). This "pauses" execution of the code in the async function at that point until the promise fulfils. It then returns the value that the promise resolved with:

```js
async function greet() {
  const greeting = await getGreetingFromAPI(); // pauses here until promise is fulfilled
  console.log(greeting); // continues once greeting is fulfilled
}
```

## Error Handling in Async Functions

When using the `await` operator, handling promise rejections is best done with a `try...catch` statement:

```js
try {
  const result = await doSomethingAsync();
  // this line will not be read if doSomethingAsync rejects
  console.log(result);
} catch (err) {
  // handle error if doSomethingAsync throws or rejects
}
```

## Awaiting multiple promises

As with promise chains, [Promise.all](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/all) can be used to wait for multiple promises to be fulfilled.

```js
async function doTwoAsyncThingsAtOnce() {
  const result = await Promise.all([doAsyncThing(), doAsyncThing()]);
  console.log(result); // [asyncThingValue1, asyncThingValue2]
}
```

## Mixing Async and Await with Promise Chains

Any async function returns a promise and is therefore "thennable" and can be used as part of a promise chain. Any function that returns a promise can be awaited. It is entirely feasible to mix and match promise chains with async / await style syntax. Take this example of an async model function, used in a promise chain in a controller function:

```js
// model
exports.selectUsers = async () => {
  const result = await db.query("SELECT * FROM users;");
  return result.rows;
};

// controller
exports.getUsers = (req, res, next) => {
  selectUsers()
    .then((users) => {
      res.status(200).send({ users });
    })
    .catch(next);
};
```

However, it will most likely lead to more readable code when an author is consistent in their approach across a project (e.g. using async/await across all controllers, or none at all).

## Async Await vs Promise Chains

### Benefits of Async Await

- Can make code look synchronous (easier to read)
- Not as much need to pass variables down a promise chain because of scoping issues
- No need to always return promise (even when resolved value is not used)
- Makes control flow easier

### Disadvantages of Async Await

- Can make code look synchronous (easier to forget async nature of code)
- Not (at the time of writing) available in top level (anywhere outside of async function) - would have to create an [IIFE](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Glossary/IIFE) to work around this
- `try...catch` for error handling can (arguably) become messier

## Further Reading

- [Async functions](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Statements/async_function)
- [The await operator](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Operators/await)
- [Making asynchronous programming easier with async and await](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Asynchronous/Async_await)
