# `this` and Object-Oriented Programming

## Prior Knowledge

- Assigning and updating properties on an object
- Behaviours of scope
- References vs values of objects

## Learning Objectives

- Understand basic distinction between Functional Programming and Object-Oriented Programming
- Be able to create a factory function
- Be able to use `this` where appropriate
- Understand difference between implicit, explicit, and default bindings of `this`.

## Programming Paradigms: Functional Programming vs Object-Oriented Programming

A programming paradigm is just another way of saying 'a style of programming'.

Functional programming is a particular programming paradigm where we prioritise creating pure functions.

A **pure** function is one that:

- avoids mutation: e.g if the function is passed an array, it will return a new array with the relevant changes rather than the same array mutated.

- has a consistent output for input: e.g. if a function invoked multiple times with the same input, the output will always be the same. This allows us to confidently carry out testing - we know what we want to always get as an output based on a test input.

We will now consider a different programming paradigm: Object-Oriented Programming (OOP).

OOP exploits the fact that objects in JavaScript can hold data in properties and hold 'behaviours' (functions) as methods. The `izzisAccount` object below holds the data of the user's `username` and `basket`, and also has a method `addToBasket` that adds an item to the `basket` array.

```js
const izzisAccount = {
  username: "izzi",
  basket: [],
  addToBasket: function (item) {
    izzisAccount.basket.push(item);
  },
};
```

## Factory Functions

If we want to create lots of objects that all have the same basic blueprint, we can create a factory function. This function can return a new object every time its called, where each one is initialised with the same template.

```js
function createUser(name) {
  const newUser = {};
  newUser.username = name;
  newUser.basket = [];
  newUser.addToBasket = function (item) {
    newUser.basket.push(item);
  };
  return newUser;
}

const izzisAccount = createUser("Izzi");
const anatsAccount = createUser("Anat");
```

Every user object created using the function above will be initialised with a key of `name`, `basket` (which is an empty array) and `addToBasket`. When `addToBasket` is invoked with an item it will update the user object's basket with the new item.

The problem is that every time we create a new user, we also create an entirely new function every time, each with a different reference in memory. This very quickly gets unsustainable.

```js
console.log(izzisAccount.addToBasket === anatsAccount.addToBasket); // FALSE
```

The solution is to bring this method outside the scope of the factory function itself:

```js
function createUser(name) {
  const newUser = {};
  newUser.username = name;
  newUser.basket = [];
  newUser.addToBasket = addToBasket;
  return newUser;
}

function addToBasket(item) {
  newUser.basket.push(item); // gives ReferenceError: newUser is not defined
}
```

We no longer have reference to what object `newUser` is referring to now, which is where `this` comes in...

## `this`

### Implicit Binding

We can replace `newUser` with `this`, which represents the **context** of the function. Whenever a function is called as a method of an object, the `this` inside of it gets implicitly bound to whatever object is calling the function (i.e. the object left of the dot).

```js
function addToBasket(item) {
  this.basket.push(item);
}

izzisAccount.addToBasket("sandwiches");
```

In the example above, `izzisAccount` is the 'owner' of the function `addToBasket`, so any occurences of `this` within that function act as placeholders for the `izzisAccount` object.

### Explicit Binding

We can call and explicitly set the value of this of a function call by using the function methods call and apply.

```js
addToBasket.call(izzisAccount, "sandwiches");
addToBasket.apply(izzisAccount, ["sandwiches"]);
```

Both of the above invoke the function `addToBasket`, setting the value of `this` to be `izzisAccount`. The difference between `call` and `apply` is only in how you pass in arguments to `addToBasket` - `call` takes multiple arguments, whereas `apply` takes an array of arguments.

Another method available is `bind`.

```js
const addToIzzisBasket = addToBasket.bind(izzisAccount);
```

Invoking bind returns a new function - in the example above, it returns a copy of `addToBasket` where the value of `this` is **always** going to be the `izzisAccount` object. A bound function cannot have the `this` value changed.

### Default Binding

If we call a function containing the `this` keyword without providing any context then `this` will get its value by 'default binding'. This means that it will bind to the `global` object (which is the `window` if you do this in the browser). This can be dangerous as we can accidentally start adding keys and values to the `global` - this is the case in code below, which adds the key of 'favouriteAnimal' and value of 'Hedgehog' to the global object.

```js
function addFavouriteAnimal(animal) {
  this.favouriteAnimal = animal;
}

addFavouriteAnimal("Hedgehog");
console.log(global);
```

The `console.log(global)` would show the entire global object with a key of favouriteAnimal and a value of "Hedgehog"!

### Arrow functions

The `this` value in an arrow function is automatically bound to the `this` value of the enclosing context of the function at the point of creation - not invocation (i.e. lexically). Attempting to actively set the `this` value (via implicit or explicit binding) will not work.

```js
const changeName = (newName) => {
  this.name = newName;
};

function createAccount(name) {
  const newUser = {};
  newUser.name = name;
  newUser.changeName = changeName;
  return newUser;
}

const davidsAccount = createAccount("David");

davidsAccount.changeName("Tom");

console.log(davidsAccount.name); //'David'
console.log(this.name); //'Tom'
```

In the above example, `changeName` is an arrow function. Therefore its `this` value will be set to the `this` value in the global scope. `name` how now been set as a property on global's `this` value, with a value of "Tom" and the `name` property on `davidsAccount` hasn't changed.
